This week on the podcast, old friend
Carl Richards joins me to talk about his
new book, Your Money: Reimagining Wealth
in 101 Simple Sketches. If the name
sounds familiar, he created the sketch
guy column in the New York Times. It ran
there for a decade. He's probably done
more than anyone to expand usage of the
phrase the behavior gap, the difference
between people's portfolios and and what
the results are. I [music] I thought our
conversation was charming and I think
you will also. With no further ado,
here's me and Carl Richards talking
about money.
>> Carl, welcome to Bloomberg.
>> Very so fun. Been looking forward to
this for years.
>> Same. Same. Long overdue. We've had you
on At the Money, but we haven't had you
for the long sit down. Let's start out
talking about your background.
>> University of Utah, School of Business,
Bachelors of Science in Finance. That
implies uh finance investing money. Was
that the original career plan?
>> Yeah. No, not even close.
>> Really?
>> Right. Yeah. So, I was um I've told this
story occasionally. Uh I was an
undeclared major.
>> Mhm. Which means back then it meant you
had no idea what you wanted to do with
your life, right? I was the newest hire
at a landscaping company. So I was
literally digging ditches for a living.
I come home one day, my wife, we'd
recently been married. This was 95.
Recently been married and she has the
help wanted ads open. She's got a job
degree in finance, a job as the CFO of a
small real estate company. Got the help
wanted ads open. So I was like, "Hey
Cor, her name's Cor. Corey, what are you
looking what are you doing?" She said,
"I'm looking for a job." I said, "Well,
what do you find?" He said, "No." I
said, "But you have one." And she said,
"I know. I'm looking for you."
[laughter] I was like, "What are you
finding?" And she found what we both
thought was a security guard job
>> at at a little shop called Fidelity.
>> A security guard. I was like, you know,
I could work at as a mall cop at night.
This will be great. So, I can still go
to school full-time. This will be great.
I went to apply. Nothing about kung fu,
nothing about self-defense. You know,
they were asking about things. I didn't
know what they were.
>> Securities.
>> Exactly. I didn't know the difference.
And I got
>> I was going to call BS on this because
it sounds like, wait, how are you a
finance major? But that happened
afterwards.
>> Yeah, that's exactly right. So I I get
through the interview, which tells you a
lot about the applicant pool, right? And
they had narrowed it down to none two of
us
>> and they're they offered it to the other
guy and the other guy said, "I don't
want it. You take it." So that's how I
ended up at Fidelity's national call
center just before uh Netscape's IPO.
>> That's unbelievable. I started on a
trading desk and I was told, "Hey,
rookie, no trading Netscape IPO." So,
you and I started just about around the
same time.
>> You know what was crazy about that was
like after I got clear that I wasn't a
security guard, I was like, "What's this
job?"
>> And I was sort of looking around.
Everybody was using calculators, right,
and and math and I was like, "Okay, this
must be right. This must be a math job."
And then, you know, a couple weeks into
training, they called us out onto the
trading floor to answer phones because
back then, you couldn't get a quote. you
couldn't place a trade unless you
called. And it was the it was the day of
the Netscape IPO. And I remember
thinking
>> this isn't math, you know what I mean?
And that was like my first introduction
to this idea of like so I got I I like
to say that I got in by accident. But
I've stayed because of that moment like
this like what is this crazy thing that
we call money? Because nobody was doing
math in there. They were excited, mad,
angry, upset, right? So it was that was
because I always thought it was a
mistake getting into finance. I always
thought I would go off and do organiza I
was going to do the Steven CVY
organizational behavior thing at BYU.
Right. Right. That's what I always
thought because work is where people go
to do things that matter.
>> And then this some of these early
experiences open the door to like money
is the ultimate portal.
>> Hey, this funny thing is
>> it's the ultimate portal to somebody's
soul. Do you know what I mean? Like like
what do you really care about? I I can
find out pretty quickly how you spend
your money and how you spend your time.
So that's how I stayed. So yes, that
afterwards I was like maybe I should get
a degree in this.
>> So So then you switch you you get your
degree in finance from the David Eckley
School of Business. When do you go for
CFP? When do you become a certified
financial planner?
>> I was looking at that the other day. Um
>> you don't remember, do you?
>> No, I I I all I remember is I got made
fun of because I had
>> for taking
>> Yeah, remember back in the day, right?
Like I left
>> I don't remember. left Fidelity and I
went to work for a a big brokerage firm
which we'll go a name but has a bullet
as it symbol is owned by a bank right
and and about that and I got my SEMA
designation cuz that's what like cool
kids did you know the sort of
institutional consulting stuff
>> because I thought I got to I got to
figure this thing out this whole money
thing and then I started to get my CFP
so it was in the day when people in the
that side of the business were like what
are you wasting your time on that for
pretty early
>> this whole fiduciary thing I mean
>> seriously
>> wasted goals
>> what what are you going not charge
people commission. [laughter] I What are
you thinking, Paul?
>> That's right. That's right. So fun.
>> So, so what I find fascinating about
your career and I'm now learning all the
parallels between our career.
>> Yeah.
>> You you kind of reinvent yourself as a
communicator,
>> as an author, as a speaker. Is that
something that helped you when you set
up your own investment firm? Um
>> like which came first, the chicken or
the egg? Yeah, I I can remember
who was in the room and and where I was
when I first sketched something out
because I didn't I wasn't a doodler in
school. It's obvious that I didn't take
any art classes, right?
>> I don't know if I would say it's obvious
cuz these are really kind of
interesting. Like Charles Schultz very
famously drew peanuts and said he didn't
have um skill.
>> Super generous comparison. Thank you.
>> Right. But oh, I'm not making that
comparison. [laughter] I'm just saying
someone else
>> somebody else said something similar.
Good. But I just remember sitting across
the table from some really smart
clients.
>> Uhhuh.
>> And they were he was an ER doctor. She
was a technology sales rep like at EMC
or something back in the day, right?
>> Super smart. And I was trying to explain
some concept and and I was just getting
blank stairs. You know the feeling. And
I that had happened before. But it this
is the first time it dawned on me like
wait, they're really smart. This must be
my problem. So I out of an act of
desperation in the shared conference
room there was a whiteboard nobody used
it
>> and I stood up one day I was like no
like this and just like some boxes and
arrows like an estate planner would do
you know and they were like
>> oh
>> oh and I and at that moment I was like I
didn't make a grand conclusion I just
remember thinking huh that was really
interesting so that started this idea of
like how so I started thinking like
anytime I got asked a question more than
once so the second time I got asked it I
was like what if I just wrote down the
answer and sent it to everybody who
asked
>> and that I don't know if you remember
but there was these things called blogs.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Back in the day.
>> Not only do I remember
>> you were one of the OGs.
>> I still I still am doing it. I I have no
interest in Beehive or Substack. I like
I I kind of learned early on I don't
want to give my content to another
company.
>> Yeah. So started putting those things up
on the internet a an answer to a
question with some sort of diagram and
and by the way the handdrawn sketches
were just a fatal were a flaw at the
beginning. I mean I went to download
Adobe Illustrator and the download thing
said 3 hours
>> and I was like anything that takes three
hours to download I should not be using.
>> Illustrator would ruin this. The whole
beauty of, and I know you most of you
are listening to this and not watching
me thumb through a book, but the whole
beauty of your sketches is just how
simple and informative they are with
just a few lines, a few circles, a few
squiggles. It's not a giant, you know,
organizational chart. It's, oh, he did
that in 90 seconds and look how much
information is in that.
>> Well, thank you. But that early on it
was like I was only doing that because I
couldn't download Adobe Illustrator. I
saw it as a flaw. And so every couple of
years early on I would I would get them
designed by somebody and I'd post those
and people be like where are the hand? I
so I finally learned I'm only telling
you these stories because it's so
tempting of us to look back and create
these like beautiful narratives of the
experience. But it turns out there was
just a lot of random experimentation and
playing because it turns out the thing I
thought was a flaw ended up being the
feature.
>> Huh. Right.
>> That's really interesting.
>> Yeah.
>> So I I'm I'm surprised you think of it
as a flaw.
>> Not anymore.
>> Um how long did it take you to get to
that point? Because to me
>> the beauty of your drawings are first of
all it's obviously not AI slop. It's you
predate AI by 20. years or so, but more
importantly, they just look and feel
human and personal
>> and oh, someone has really put some time
into figuring out how do I communicate a
complicated idea in the least amount of
of
>> letters, words, images?
>> Yeah.
>> So, so at what point did you think, hey,
I could do something with these
drawings? Maybe publish them in the New
York Times every week.
>> Never. What happened was I was putting
these up on this website. I tried to
stop,
>> right?
>> It was like a compulsion.
>> Can't can't help it.
>> Yeah. I mean, and I even had people
around me who were like, "Just focus on
building your business. What are you
doing?" And I was like,
>> and they were right. Do you know what I
mean? Like all the evidence I mean, but
like they at the time and I kept putting
it up there and there's a guy named Kent
who I did not know.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Kent sent them to a guy named Ron who I
did not know. Ron Liieber at the time.
>> Oh, sure. I know Ron. I know of Ron
Lever.
>> Kent didn't know Ron and Ron just sent a
note like, "Hey, I think you might like
these."
>> And Ron sent me a note and I have that
email still cuz nobody believes me. The
email was, "Hey, we love these. Could we
try something?"
>> And I knew enough from my like security
guard background, right, to be a a kid
in the hills of Utah to say, I mean, I
never thought I was like, "Yeah, of
course. What do you have in mind?" And
that's kind of how and I've talked to
Ron since like, "Why did you open that
email?" cuz you know like he gets like
you get inundated with
>> stacks of books, stacks of things that
he would love to reply to and read cuz
that's the kind of human he is but he
just doesn't have time.
>> So why he open that one that day? I
don't know. I should still be sending
Kent a a gift every every year. So I
never thought
>> maybe this could appear in the times.
>> So So from the late 90s when do you
launch the firm that you ultimately
build up and sell in 2012?
>> Yeah. So I I am really really bad with
dates, but I we were in um
>> early 2000s.
>> No, 2008 or nine.
>> So after the financial crash.
>> That's exactly right.
>> So four years you build this up. Why why
sell it? You just like hey I'm going to
focus on my security guard business or
>> the first thing I should tell you is why
like why I left and started my own firm.
I remember the thing that the impetus
for that was two two things. One
>> this is at Fidelity. No, I was now
working at the big brokerage firm. Okay.
>> And I left to start my own RAA firm.
>> Got it.
>> And I remember when the Do you remember
that cover? I can't remember if it was
Fortune or Forbes. It had the cover with
um Rex and David at DFA and it said how
the Really Smart Money Invest.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Do you remember? I had that. I had that
in the top drawer
>> of my desk every time I opened my drawer
cuz I still had this like I'm just a kid
from the hills in Utah like imposttor
syndrome thing. Like I I'm supposed to
be in jail. Do you know what I mean?
like like and I'm helping people make
really important decisions with money. I
need to figure out like am I a security
guard? Is this math? Like what is this
thing? And I so this idea of like how
the really smart money invests. I called
and was like how do I get access to
this? They're like well you can't do it
where you're at. So I left for that
reason. And then the second reason was
ended up being one of the greatest
disappointments of my life. I left
because I thought it was really
important to be able to tell everybody
that I was a fiduciary and that
everybody would care. And I and I left
and one of the greatest disappointments
of my career was nobody seemed to care.
I mean, of course, you and I both both
know it's incredibly important. But the
most people don't know. I just remember
people looking at me like, "Fuchia,
what? Like what what what do you what do
you of course you put my interest
first?" So that's why I left to start
the firm.
>> Huh. That's that's fascinating. Yeah. So
you sell it in 2012. When did the sketch
guy columns for the New York Times
start?
>> Um before that. Is that is that right?
No. Oh, yeah. Way before I started I
sold the firm. Part of the reason I sold
so I think 2000
>> you sold the firm to concentrate on your
doodles.
>> That's right. So I the book came out in
2012 and I sold the firm about the same
time and I remember specifically having
this conversation with my wife. I was
like, "Oh, we'll never sell this thing."
I always thought of it as a security
blanket. Like I'd never sell it. It
>> it's an annuity. It generates income
every year and and
>> typically you have a 10% win at your
back just due to marketing.
>> Such a great business, right?
>> It it is a good business.
>> That's right.
>> And especially if you're a fiduciary and
doing the right thing by your client,
you you not only make a decent living,
you get to sleep at night.
>> That's exactly right. All the things.
So, I never thought I'd sell it. There
was just this increasing demand. The
book was coming out. I was getting asked
to speak all over the world. It was
clear that I really, really like that
stuff. You had to make a choice.
>> And in the end, I was like, "This is a
security." My wife said, "Hey, maybe
it's an anchor."
>> And I was like,
>> you guys speak the same love language.
It's kind of fascinating.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. Cuz just think about
>> that's a very insightful observation
from your wife. She's the one who tried
to get you a hat, a shield, and
[laughter] have you parade around the
mall like Paul Blart. I mean, that's
>> exactly right. [laughter]
>> You guys are very much on the same wave.
>> Yeah, I know. It's been super I mean,
she's been amazing. 31 years and
amazing. But yeah, anyway
>> really amazing. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's and I it's the best it's ever
been and I hope it's better tomorrow. Do
you know what I mean? Like the one of
those like
>> two competing truths at the same time.
Like I could have never dreamed of it
>> and
>> and I just wanted to get
>> a little bit better tomorrow. And I I
hope I never stopped thinking that way.
But anyway, left, sold the firm
full-time into this speaking writing
thing for a little while. Was at a big
firm sort of the firm that bought my
company was there for a while. Mhm.
>> Um,
>> another nameless firm.
>> Yeah, that was at back then it was
Buckingham. So,
>> Oh, okay. I kind of remember that.
>> W went and to work for those and loved
it.
>> Who else did you work with there? There
were some people I really liked.
>> Larry Swedro, Tim.
>> Tremendous. Larry Swed.
>> Yeah, that whole crew. Adam, mom, the
whole the whole crew there. It was
really, really good.
>> Um, really, really interesting. So, so
we're going to spend a little bit of
time talking about behavior, but
>> you know, you came from a big shop. You
came from several big shops. Fidelity,
Merryill, um, as well as Buckingham.
>> They all have PhDs and Monte Carlo
simulations and they run factor model
tests and yet people still buy high and
sell low. What is it about the human
condition that is a permanent drag on
performance?
>> It's such like that feels to me like the
question that I've been exploring for 20
years.
>> That's why I asked it.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I mean there to me I
thought at first I remember I almost
left the business because I I couldn't
solve this problem like after I got my
SEMA designation and I came back.
>> Explain for lay people that
>> the certified investment management
analyst. So it was sort of like for
people who were doing institutional
consulting work. So I thought it was
>> so not a CFA but more than a CFP.
>> Yeah. and sort of like CFA light that
can talk to people,
>> you know, and and it was back then it
was taught in conjunction with Wharton.
So I went to Wharton for two like that
was the whole reason I I I'm always
looking for external validation back
then.
>> Right. So
>> goes hand inhand with the imposter
syndrome.
>> That's exactly right. That's exactly
right. So and I'm not afraid to admit
it. Um
>> but I came back from that working with
clients and realized like okay now I've
got this great system, the best training
in the world. honestly some of the best
training at the firm, right? And yet I
still had this repeated experience where
we would create really detailed
spreadsheets of how to hire and fire
managers.
>> Mhm.
>> And then we'd have this experience over
and over where the m the manager that
showed up on our buy screen, we would
commit clients money to it. It would
become the I thought that was our job,
the search for the best investment. We'd
find the best investment. We'd commit
clients money to it. And then it would
go through a normal
cyclical period of underperformance and
it would show up on our fire screen.
>> Mhm.
>> And I, you know, I repeated that like
two or three times over maybe a three or
four year period and was like, I I don't
know what's going on. Like I maybe it's
just me. And then I and then I ran
across some of that industry research
around investor returns versus
investment returns
>> where you see that the average
investment, right? Average investor
underperforms the average investment.
Now whether it's anything close to
>> not not only does the average investor
underperform the average investment but
the average investor underperforms their
own investors.
>> So it's like I just remember find I
remember like being so excited that it
wasn't just me. Do you know what I mean?
Like wait this is a this is an
industrywide huge problem. So that's
when I was like, "Wow, how do we I mean,
what that research said to me was that I
could own a mediocre investment. If I
behaved correctly, I would outperform
99% of my neighbors." And that's all we
care about in the first place, right? Is
outperforming our neighbors. That's the
whole goal, right? Right. So
>> how is that idiot down the block getting
rich and I'm not.
>> Yeah. Exactly. As if that's the thing
that matters. But that's what we
>> That's how people roll.
>> That's exactly right. So I just remember
so digging into that a bit. I I really
think like Buffett's statement that if
you were to design a poor investor, you
would design a human,
>> right? Right.
>> Is as close as we get. Like the hard
wiring, we are hardwired. And it was I
think it was in one of Zwag's books
where they hooked up scanners and had
people open their brokerage statements,
right? Like talk about a masochistic
experiment. And if the broker statement
was down,
>> you process that in the same part of
your brain as you do mortal danger. like
where I'm doing for like a bear break or
flight right there. It's the my favorite
Bill Bernstein quote is uh it's all
about your amygdala. If you don't get if
you don't get your lyic system under
control, you will die poor. And it's
that exact same system.
>> That's right. And then Right. Yeah. Like
and if it's if the statement's up, same
part of your brain as you do security
and pleasure. Mhm.
>> And I think it was in the book that for
women that's chocolate and for men
that's sex and I didn't quite understand
the difference in the book, but
>> between sex and chocolate [laughter]
just
>> must be a fun date.
>> So, so if that's what's going on, it's a
little bit like the interaction we have
with our phones now.
>> Uhhuh.
>> You know, like on the other side of that
interaction are 300 PhDs trying to get
us to pay attention to what's going on
on Instagram, right? And I just think we
finally have to recognize unless we put
some serious guardrails in between us
and the big mistake, we're going to make
the big mistake because it feels like I
don't care what you tell me, Barry, my
hands on a stove, I'm taking it off.
>> Do you know what I mean?
>> 100%.
>> So I think that that to me is the work
of worrying about like what does it mean
to be a real investor, a successful
investor versus what it means to find
good investments.
>> Let's talk a little bit about the
behavior gap. I don't know if you
created that phrase, but you've done
more than anybody else I know to
popularize that phrase.
>> Tell us what the behavior gap actually
is.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, it started out as a very
narrow thing which we already pointed to
this difference between and and like the
technical term would be the difference
between time weighted rates of return
and dollar weighted. And because I've
had to explain this so many times, maybe
I'll I'll go through the explanation.
>> Sure. Imagine you open a newspaper.
There's an ad for a mutual fund. It says
the fund has returned 10% a year for the
last 10 years, right? That's the
investment return. And just for a
minute, forget taxes and, you know, any
sort of fees or whatever. That's the
investment return. That's the return you
would have gotten if you had invested
money at the beginning of the 10-year
period
>> and not added or taken anyway and left
it there for the 10-year period. But
nobody invests that way except your
clients, right? Like no, nobody invests
that way. They we are always chasing,
right?
>> Right.
>> Whatever we hear in the news, the
financial pornography network waves
their hands and we've got a list of 10
funds to buy or whatever. In the old
days, smart money, you know, like the
smart. So, we end up running around and
that's the average investment return is
10%. But the average investor return is
always different from that.
>> Who does the annual report that
everybody criticizes?
>> Yeah. Yeah, for sure. that shows this
differential.
>> So that that was one of the early
reports I ran across was Dowbar and and
I I have not spent the well I spent the
time years ago to understand. I don't
really know anything about that number.
I know Morning Star does a a number and
it seems to be
>> 80 80 to 100 basis points not 6%. Right.
You know like
>> and then what about the Spiva numbers on
manager performance?
>> Yeah for sure. So, so you're you're
running across these behavioral errors
>> on pretty much both sides. The manager
>> who's running their funds and frequently
underperforming and the longer that
timeline is, the greater percentage of
managers are underperforming. And on the
other side, the buyers of those funds,
>> yeah,
>> tend to not only underperform the
benchmark, they're underperforming their
own funds. So, so if only there was an
alternative way to invest.
>> Let me tell you a quick story. So, this
is back during my institutional
consulting days. So, we had this client.
We do a manager search and selection. We
find the best large cap value manager
for this client
>> and hire that large cap value manager.
And as I recall, it was Davis, New York
Venture
>> back in the day, right?
>> Chris Davis.
>> Yep. We go two or three years. Davis has
one of those cyclical underperforming
moments as they're going to do,
>> right? Especially value which runs in
and out of favor
>> and it was it was even in comparison to
other value managers, right? As they're
as they're going to do, right? So, we
fire Davis
>> not knowing any better. We hire another
and I can't remember. We'll just call
him XYZ, right? Like we hire this new
and the client's like, "Yeah, yeah, I
understand. It's two and a half two and
a half years in. We make this change. We
go to XYZ." Two and a half years later,
three years later, XYZ does the same
thing. Cyclical underperforms. We go
through our manager screening. They're
up on our fire list. And guess who pops
into our buy list?
>> Chris Davis.
>> Yeah. Call the client thinking I'm so
smart. Hey, we need to fire XYZ and hire
this manager. It's it's called Davis.
And they were like, "Wait, wait, wait,
wait, wait, wait, wait. Didn't we This
client's name was Jeremy. Didn't we just
fire them two and a half years ago?" And
I was like, "Yeah." and he said, 'You
know what I'd like? I would like the
return of Davis for the from the day we
first hired them till now. I'd like the
return of XYZ from the day you first
hired Davis to now. And I'd like that
compared to my account. I was of course
like that's not how it works. He said,
"Yeah, that's what I'd like to see." And
we all know the story, right? He
underperformed either of both of those.
Like he would have been fine in either
one of those.
>> Just leave it alone. [clears throat]
>> Just leave. And that was my first moment
of like I got to get out of this
business. I got to go to law school or
something. And that's when I discovered
this idea or for myself discovered this
idea that maybe the investment process
only matters to the degree that I can
behave.
>> So, so let's talk about what you call
the financial pornography
networks. They talk all day long about
10-year yield and the Fed and credit
spreads and geopolitics and earnings and
news. And you spend most of your books
plural talking about fear, regret, envy.
>> What what moves markets and what more
importantly
>> moves investors portfolios?
>> Gosh, it's such a good question and I
want to be like careful about
>> you know I do this for a living.
>> I know it's a really good question and I
want to be careful about the term
financial pornography network. I think
that was originally a Jane Bryant Quinn
term which I which I love. That's
exactly right. which I love. I love the
term, but I think it applies just really
broadly. And
>> I call it the fire hose of financial
noise.
>> That's fine. I think like sometimes
media circus like it's a it's a media
business and there's nothing I I want to
be clear like I live in the hills in
Utah. I ride my mountain bike every day.
The trails out my backyard. I have a
different hobby.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Just because that's my hobby doesn't
mean my hobbies are better than anybody
else's hobbies.
>> They're healthier. I well I but I lock
walk in this building and I see happy
human after happy human walking through
the halls. This is like shiny happy
people everywhere. I'm who am I?
>> Three cappuccino.
>> Who am I to say? Right. So So but I
think what's important is if we start to
recognize like what are we doing it for?
What's the goal? Because if it's
something to talk about,
>> there's nothing wrong with that. If it's
entertainment, there's nothing wrong
with that. But basing your financial
decisions, your actual investment
decisions on something you heard, even
if it was secret underneath the subway
and it was labeled, isn't the economist
the one that all the really smart people
read anyway, right? Like you're not the
only one that's heard that.
>> So I think we have to be careful with
sort of making big investment decisions
based on every wind of news or
entertainment, right? versus linking.
And again, this is back to like how do
we solve this behavior app problem. I
think it's got to be it has to be the
portfolio
has to be designed to give me the
greatest likelihood of reaching my goals
and my goals have to be carefully
clarified and they're going to change
over time. So, I need it's this constant
process of saying is this are these
investment decisions aligned with what I
want out of my life. Both of those sides
of that equation are really challenging.
Getting clear about what you want out of
your life, super hard. Making sure you
have a portfolio built on data and
evidence and and that will get you the
closest to that also really hard.
>> So, let's break that into two pieces.
Yeah, cuz I kind of feel like there are
two distinct conversations.
>> We'll get to the goal portion in a
moment.
>> I want to stay with the media circus.
>> Yeah. Isn't there really a very simple
problem
>> and that is the mismatch in time
horizons when you're putting money away
>> to save for retirement or even to save
for 529 for college or saving to buy a
house or a second house or whatever
>> like you're thinking 5 10 50 years
>> but all of the financial noise that fire
hose that's about that's the church of
what's happening right now right so
If we can simply readjust our media
consumption into some context with the
longevity of our portfolio goals,
>> doesn't that solve a lot of these?
>> Why do if I'm putting this money away
for 20, 30 years, what do I care what
happened on a random Thursday?
>> But yeah, and and I gosh, what if we had
kept what if we actually kept track of
every single change of opinion, right?
and how sure somebody was. I remember
that what's that old statement that even
a broken clock is right twice a day.
>> Right. I was going to say um
>> who
>> um often wrong never in doubt.
>> That's exactly often wrong. And that's
the like again entertaining and there's
nothing wrong with entertainment. We go
to the movies, we go see plays, we ride
our mountain bikes. Like there's nothing
wrong with entertainment. I just think
we have to understand what it is. And
you're what you're saying is yeah, that
that's day-to-day entertainment. And I
like it because I can talk about it.
It's important. Don't base my 20, my 10,
my five, my 10, my 20 year decisions on
it.
>> Right? And yet, and yet we continue to
see people um h have that problem. So,
let let me re ask this question in a
different way. How do you bridge the gap
between what clients ask for, what they
think they want,
>> and what you know they actually need?
>> Yeah. Another Barry, you're super good
at this whole job.
>> It's all AI. It's all I didn't write in.
>> No, I just because that now you've
layered another problem in here is
because clients, the humans that we call
clients show up having been trained by
us as an industry, speaking really
broadly, that what matters is this
day-to-day stuff, right? They think the
job of an investor is to find the best
investment because we tr we taught them
that on the on the television waving our
hands. So, it's no surprise like we we
did this to ourselves. It's no surprise
that clients come in expecting that. And
that's why I think clients who work with
real financial advisors often go through
a period of finan the financial
pornography detox program.
>> Mhm.
>> Right. Where they maybe wake up 18, 24
months into the relationship and go,
"Hey, you know what? I'm not really
paying that much attention anymore to
that." Like all the stuff I used to
think mattered was critical has lost its
urgency, its tenor. Right? So, we've got
this problem of like it feels like, and
again, back to the the wiring in our
bodies, like it feels like we should be
doing something.
>> The news is saying we should be doing
something. The guy at the club is saying
we should be doing something. And I call
Barry and Barry says, "Hey, let's let's
hold on for a second. Let's review the
Are these goals still the goals? Did is
this still what's important to you?"
Turns out if that's true, we're okay
here. And almost always we end up at the
same place which is diversified lowcost
portfolio hold on to it for a long time.
>> There's this inherent bias towards
action
>> for sure
>> which is the nature of that fight
orflight response.
>> Yeah. One or the other right?
>> Don't just sit there do something and
really the right way to do it is don't
just do something sit there.
>> But that causes a great deal of
uncomfortableness
amongst people.
>> Um let let's take this to the next
phase. So
>> Jack Bogle and and Vanguard gave us low
cost.
>> Uh everything we've learned from Richard
Thaylor and the behavioral finance folks
is about the importance of humility.
>> What does the next generation of
investors learn once they figure out
>> diversified lowcost and a little bit of
humility? Where do you go next?
>> Yeah. Yeah. You know what's so hard
about that is this like everyone's a
gambler thing that's sort of slipped
>> especially today.
>> Yeah. that it's sort of slipped in. Like
it's it's I don't envy growing up as a
you know 25 30 year old person trying to
sort this out right now because it it
just feels like everything's a bet,
right? And and it is
>> Yeah. And it is I think to me
I mean I I'm careful with advice but the
observation that I've noticed most
frequently is that if I can when I'm
younger focus on human capital and then
realize that the money over here does
the job of compounding
right my main job should be to earn a
bit more raise my human capital. my
ability to earn and save when I'm young
will far outstrip getting an extra 25
basis points by paying attention to you
know some newsletter on the internet.
>> You know it it's funny you you mentioned
um gambling being everywhere. We were
talking before
>> the podcast about Ninefinger Howie and
he wrote a a post and created an index
called the degeneracy index where he
puts in all of the various prediction
markets and gambling apps and and it's
been outperforming the NASDAQ which has
been on fire like two to one and it just
is a kind of warning that
>> it's a warning that all right I
understand the Supreme Court decision
that says gambling can't just be legal
in one state. But maybe the decision
isn't to make it legal everywhere. Maybe
the decision is to say an entire
industry based on human foibless,
cognitive errors, and innumeracy.
>> It is kind of an evil industry.
>> It's just we're the problem we need to
realize that we're just not wired for
it. It's not that we're dumb. It's not
that we're this bad. Like we can have
any discussion we want about the
morality of the whole thing, but the the
underneath it all sits this idea like
we're not wired to handle it. Like it it
it it we're not and I think this is
another piece that's interesting right
now is I don't think we're really sort
of wired to handle the level of
uncertainty that we're dealing with
right now like that sort of change
fatigue.
>> And it seems like a lot of what Wall
Street sells is this illusion of
certainty.
>> Yeah. This false sense of precision.
like it's certainly so easy to sell.
It's impossible to deliver,
>> but it's super easy to sell because
everybody wants to buy it. So, I think
those are the two like human capital
and learning how to
come to grips with the reality that the
world is uncertain.
>> So, the quote of yours that always stays
with me uh is money is less about math
and more about emotion. That was your
insight
>> watching the Netscape IPO. Mhm.
>> Why is that so challenging for um this
industry for finance to accept
>> it? It seems to me and I've been in a
lot of the rooms where this discussion
takes place that we just we have a deep
sense of physics envy
>> for sure. like we just want the law of
gravity for money. And and when we
understand that the systems that handle
money, markets, economies,
politics, and then and then humans,
those are a mix of complex adaptive
systems. They're not simple systems, and
they're not even complicated. They're
complex, adaptive, almost chaotic. And
when you understand a complex adaptive
system, you start to understand that
like there is no even with the benefit
of hindsight and you see this all the
time I'm sure like even with the benefit
of hinds we look back and like here are
seven steps to having it turns out that
that only works for that period of time
right you replicate those seven steps it
doesn't work again
>> all models assume the future looks like
the past and very often the future looks
nothing like the past
>> exactly like all models are wrong let's
make ours useful is like much more
helpful this idea of saying like, okay,
if that's the reality I live in, then
how do I navigate a complex adaptive
system? And then that gets us to this
point where it's more about like the
problem is you, the problem is me, the
problem is like it's us. And so it's I
think that's why it's so hard is we have
to say, "Oh man, we don't know exactly
what we're dealing with here because
it's so cute after a big crisis to see
all the people who have very specific
plans about how to avoid that exact
same." We're still taking our shoes off
in airports.
You don't have TSA pre yet?
>> Well, yeah, I do. I haven't. That's
true. I haven't taken my shoes off.
>> I share one of my favorite random data
points. I don't know if this made it
into the last book.
>> Um, but earthquake insurance,
>> earthquake insurance sales go up
tremendously
right after an earthquake. Sure.
>> And if you think about how the plate
tectonics work about these two pieces of
um I'm so excited for you
sliding
>> the odds of an earthquake happening
after that 10 20 30 years of pressure is
released plummets immediately. The worst
time to buy earthquake insurance
>> over and over
>> is right after the earthquake. The best
time is, hey, this is an earthquake zone
and we haven't had an earthquake in 20
25 years. Now's a time.
>> I remember getting offered structured
notes with downside protection in like
October 02 and I'm like, why do I need
this? The NASDAQ is down 83%. Where were
you in late 99 when this might have been
useful? Down 83%. I'm a buyer. I don't
need I want all the upside. Why do I
want to give any of this? Like I had
that conversation in a room full of the
salespeople pitching this and got called
into the chairman's office. What are you
doing? We're trying to set up a
relationship with these people. I'm
like, this is crap. Nobody should own
this product. And I'm like, I know you
want a relationship. Tell them not to
not bring us junk that we don't need. I
mean, look, I like dessert as much as
the next.
>> This is what I came for right here. But
[laughter] I I I just I remember I there
are several times when
>> I would get called as the market
strategist
>> called into the vice chair who was
general counsel or the chair. It's like
what are you by the way the firm
>> Lehman Brothers. Yeah.
>> So not only was I right, but the
counterparty risk was you would have
gotten nothing anyway.
>> Yeah. And we will go to the lengths we
will go to make up stories about that
after the fact. Do you remember I can't
I look I'm going to deeply paraphrase
and I'm sure I'm ruining the story but
after long-term capital management went
under
>> uh 98.
>> Do you remember and I again there was
some quote where one of those
>> PhD Nobel Prize winners
>> said our models weren't wrong
just refused to conform to it.
>> So I don't remember who it was but
>> broad thing
>> when genius failed that quote is
somewhere in that book.
>> That's exactly right. And and I only
point that out to point out that I I
certainly will go to great lengths to
make a acute story that will protect me
from dealing with uncertainty because
our our nervous system takes uncertainty
as a threat. And it turns out like we're
we are in a period of uncertainty and I
I don't think we're going back to be
honest.
>> Well, let let me let me I'm I'm this is
supposed to be about you the guest, but
you you pushed my
>> Please. This is what I'm here for.
>> We're all here for this. So [laughter]
when whenever you hear people saying
markets hate uncertainty, my knee-jerk
response is always markets thrive on
certainty. The only time there's
certainty is when everybody is on the
same
>> side of the boat. In late 99, everybody
was certain trees grew to the sky.
>> And in March 09, everybody was certain
markets were going to zero. That's
right.
>> Except for the handful of people who
stepped up and bought. Yeah. un the
future is inherently unknown and
unknowable. That's right.
>> When people say uh things are uncertain,
I I always feel like what they're saying
is normally I could lie to myself enough
that I could BS you people that I have
some idea what's going to happen, but
god damn, whatever's going on is so
crazy. I can't maintain that fiction
anymore, so I default to uncertainty.
That's right. In reality, most of the
time, everything is inherently
uncertain.
>> That can I let me just just real
quickly. I'm super interested in what
you think about this. I I feel like you
and I came up the financial planning
industry, the financial advice industry
really grew up during a a period that
was an aberration. There was some
>> for a certain group of people, there was
a predictable path of progress.
>> What? Give me some years. My grandpa I'm
seeing postw war. My grandpa okay my
grandpa got a got a degree could afford
a firsttime home with that salary stayed
there for 30 years retired with a
pension. There was this window
>> that was the aberration the entire
postwear period
>> is the aberration. Yes that's exactly
>> like the roaring 20s the uber rich and
the rest of us please things weren't
like that. That's normal
>> that things weren't like that before
>> right
>> and they aren't like that now. And I
think the problem is
>> we falsely believe that oh this is the
new era.
>> The problem is that was when we built
all of our tools our language our
planning tools our Monte Carlo
simulations our during that aberration
period I think much more likely is like
if you think it's uncertain feels like
uncertain now like we're not getting
more like we're not going back there.
>> No no it'll all settle down this will
all go away.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Ain't going to happen. So
I think to me that leads to this really
interesting discussion at least around
like how do I learn if it's a posture
shift instead of confir like trying to
defend an outdated map like confirmation
by don't you know 10 best days like it
just instead of trying to defend an
outdated map
>> explain 10 best days because it's a
great and 10 worst days it's a great
concept
>> always right like anytime anybody's
scared of anything in the markets we we
just parade out you saw this on Twitter
back when it was useful right like if
anybody said anything bad like I'm
scared or this market scares me, a bunch
of financial adviserss would jump in the
room and say, "Don't you know if if you
sell and miss the 10 best days, you may
as well be in CDs over the 20-year
period or whatever, or you miss the 10
10 worst days." And and I think
>> and they all are clumped close together.
>> That's exactly right. And and I also
think that that was an effort
>> to say um don't worry, right? When when
I think and to spray people with facts
and figures
>> when they're feeling irrational.
>> I I like the gun you hold.
>> Yeah. Spray spray people with facts and
figures cuz when you're feeling a hose
when you're feeling irrational, the last
thing you want is somebody to try and
reason with you.
>> Wait, you're telling me that pure logic
doesn't satisfy
>> teenage teenager, right? Like
>> like the last thing you want is what you
want is metaphorically a hug first,
right? Like we'll get to the facts later
and let's never get to the lecture.
>> And so I think if we shift that posture
a bit where we're like turns out
uncertainty is reality. I don't know
what the but I mean add in sequencing
risk
>> right like are we gonna have a great
market for the first five years of your
life or the last five years of your life
like who knows you add all this in
>> not that useful in the last five years
>> that's exactly right like we're it turns
out that we're we're dealing with a very
complex adaptive system and the ability
to navigate make really important
decisions in the face of irreducible
uncertainty is the primary skill like if
I was younger what I I would be studying
comp complexity theory I'd be studying
being resilient. I'd be studying
understanding how to make really
important decisions. Mountain guide,
>> you know, how do I make really important
decisions when I don't know
>> how how do I get comfortable not
knowing?
>> But they're life and death decisions.
>> And how do Yeah. Like I my some of my
favorite people are like really
thoughtful um really thoughtful like
people who worked in in distressed
because if they're on the ground with
the company they're having to make
missionritical decisions and they do not
know they don't know how they're going
to work out. I've got a really good
friend that way and he's just like yeah
I have to every day some of these
decisions are thousands of jobs
>> right
>> and I don't know how it's going to work
out. making these decisions under
intense uncertainty
>> with incomplete information and no
amount of spreadsheeting will get you
more information. The only way to get
the more information is take an action.
Fascinating, right? Like to me that's
the skill. That's what this market is
calling for in terms of leadership is
the ability to create containers for
collective interpretation rather than
scream at people.
>> Huh. So, so let's talk about this book.
>> Sure.
>> You you describe it as a conversation
grenade. Yeah,
>> explain.
>> Yeah, I first of all, I think I first
heard that term from Hugh Mloud, the
gaping boy. Remember his work?
>> I have his some of his stuff on my wall.
>> Yeah.
>> And on the opposite wall, some of your
stuff.
>> Well, that's cool. Thank you.
>> In fact, buy high, sell low, repeat
until broke.
>> Number one.
>> That's right. That's right.
>> It's on my wall. That's right. So, full
disclosure.
>> Well, thank you. Yeah, I have some of
his stuff in my office, too. So,
conversation grenades, this idea that
like it's the only reason I wrote the
book. I swore off writing.
>> Why?
>> Well, because I love audio so much,
>> right? I actually had
>> again not mutually exclusive.
>> That's exactly right. But I I you know,
after I wrote the second book, I thought
I'm just going to speak and then
podcasting came around. I was like, this
is amazing.
>> I I had between Bailout Nation and How
Not to Invest solid 15 years. Yeah, you
did.
>> Like there's like I I needed a recover.
That was my refractory period.
>> That's right. That's [laughter] right.
>> Like I need I need a decade and a half.
>> That's right. And I
>> I really needed a decade and it just
took me the pandemic to make start about
it.
>> I kept noticing that people like
physical artifacts.
>> I agree.
>> I don't love a Kindle. I I like
>> Yeah. And especially that. So the
working with with Haramman really
allowed me to Everything about the book
is designed an we have the same
publisher. I didn't even notice.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure Craig helped you.
Yeah, he's great. For sure.
>> So,
everything about that book is designed
to feel like you toss it in a room and
conversations break out. That's the
conversation grenade analogy,
>> right? You set it on coffee table.
Unpretentious coffee table book. Like,
I'm going to pick it up. I'm going to
mess with I want We talked about
hardback. I wanted it to be that soft
cover. We moved the um you know the the
front matter, the legal stuff. Go to
page one. There's none of it in there.
You moved it to the back.
>> They let me move it to the back and they
said nobody's ever asked.
>> Dude, I love that.
>> Nobody's ever asked, but yes, I was
amazed they let me to do it, but there's
that stuff's in the back cuz what reader
has ever said, "Please give me that
crap."
>> There it is in the back right there.
>> I always assumed it was a legal
requirement. It had to be up front.
>> And so they said, "Nobody's asked." So
they let me do all sorts of things that
allowed us to be like, "No, this is in
service of the reader. We want you just
to have this sit there." and the number
of stories I've heard like I had it on
my table, my son asked me a question or
I sent it out to clients and this that's
it's really meant to be a conversation
grenade.
>> So, so we started out talking about your
deceptively simple sketches.
>> Uh is this simplicity uh a conscious act
of rebellion? There's so much complexity
and arcane language. We know every
profession uses arcan language to hold
lay people at arms distance. But was
this simplicity in your sketches? Is
that purposeful or am I too much?
>> First of all, deep deeply. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I I I think it's maybe just the
way my brain works. I only have enough
RAM for like one problem at a time.
>> Okay.
>> And so I like to get into it, understand
nuance, edge cases, you know, it it gets
like a giant ball. There was actually a
sketch in there about this. like there
gets like a big giant like it's a simple
question you know simple simple simple
boom
>> what about this what about that what
about that what about that what about
that edge cases reading it all and then
there it was and then uh um
>> yeah and then once I get in there I'm
like okay now and you actually shared a
quote one time
>> about there are a lot of simple
>> investing is simple but hard
>> no there's a lot of simple there are a
lot of answers that are simple elegant
and wrong oh
>> remember this
>> I don't I don't know where I stole that.
That could actually be me.
>> Yeah. No, I remember you shared somebody
else's quote and I was like cuz
>> simple, elegant, and wrong.
>> Yeah. And I really worry about that
>> because when you're in that ball of yarn
complex, and you decide to distill or
edit, you have to make some conscious
decisions about what to leave out.
>> And I often get that wrong. And when I
do, I hear about it. And and and it it
it makes the work a little bit better.
There are words and lines in those some
of those sketches I've been thinking
about for over a decade. I removed a
word. I removed a word that had been in
there 15 years.
>> Which sketch?
>> Um it's it's uh the word was
um
>> people you love experiences spend the
money.
>> Yeah, that one's one of my favorite
ones. That is one of my favorite.
>> You do like a good ven diagram.
>> Well, by the way, the ven diagram police
have come after me, so I'm always I just
call them circle sketches. Oh, dude. I
used to get two-page emails from the
Times readers.
>> I call these people ven diagram
>> picture shaper picture straighteners
>> and but I used I used to send equal
rebuttals and then finally I just
developed a template email that said
you're right it's I call them circle
sketches. So yeah, the ven diagram piece
is pretty
>> these are these are legitimate you can
make they can make an argument of
course.
>> No, if if it's this over here, this over
here and the overlap that you want to
focus on
>> for sure
>> things that matter, things that you can
control is another one of yours.
>> What we should focus on
>> and then and then the overlap. How is
that not a vin diagram?
>> I don't know. I I I don't know, but
somebody will find. But my my my point
really is that that when you distill and
leave things out, you get things wrong
sometimes. And you asked which one like
I
>> For a point though, you're trying to
communicate cleanly and simply.
>> It's true. And but but I'm saying some
of that feedback's amazing.
>> Like the ven diagram police weren't
particularly helpful, but some of the
feedback is amazing. Like, hey, have you
ever thought of this? And it makes me
reconsider and adjust. And there have
been changes that I've made. Like
there's one sketch that says what's
important what you I used to say what's
important to you. It was an alignment
sketch. It was like your use of capital
aligned with what you say is important
to you. And that word say
>> well it's implying that it's not
important but you're claiming it's
important.
>> It bothered that word say bothered me
for a decade before I was like no no no
it's we want to get to what's important
to you not what you say.
>> You were hinting at another problem with
people not speaking. That's right.
Revealed stated versus revealed
preferences. I'm more interested in the
revealed preferences.
>> What's actually important to you?
>> That's really That's really interesting.
So So let's let's stay with the concept
of spending money.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Since I just flipped to whatever
um that was every advisor that manages
money for people can tell you story
after story after story. Um my favorite
one I'll share here. Hey, Barry's a car
guy. He has a boat. You want to buy a
boat and a car? Why don't you talk to
Barry? So, I speak to the client. So,
I'm thinking about buying a 60 foot, 50
foot, whatever sailboat and I'm thinking
about buying a Ferrari. I go, that's
really easy. What's your boating
experience? Zero. [laughter] You don't
start with a 50, 60 foot sailboat that
requires a crew. It's two and a half
million dollars. You'll take it out
twice. You'll sell it for a 30% loss. On
the other hand, go by the way, this guy
could buy a Ferrari a month for the rest
of eternity and he's fine.
>> Go buy the Ferrari, take the whole
family down to the Ferrari high
performance driving school, which I'll
let you in on a little secret. All of
these advanced driving schools, they're
really defensive driving classes in
disguise. Correct. And you will learn
not only the limits of the car that
you'll get nowhere near, but you'll
learn the limits of your own driving
ability. Yeah. And more importantly,
learn how to operate within your own
skill set.
>> And so will your kids if you bring them
>> That's right. So everybody becomes a
better, safer driver.
>> Yeah.
>> So
>> he goes out and buys the Ferrari. They
do the class. They love it.
>> Yeah.
>> He also buys the boat. A year later he
sells it for a 30% loss.
>> Yeah. Anytime Barry gets on the phone
with a client, the adviser always says,
"Do not mention the boat." So,
[laughter] the only thing worse than
being right is being wrong. And I could
say this at the back of a podcast
because you can confess to murder at the
end of a podcast and no one
>> no one knows [laughter]
>> no one will hear. So, I'm very
comfortable saying this here. But so
with that Barry digression here, let's
talk about
>> how do you help people focus on what's
important, what matters, and what the
purpose of money really is? What should
they be doing?
>> Yeah.
>> With their money.
>> Especially later in life, they've
accumulated a nice pile.
>> Can't take it with you.
>> Yeah. running experiment like practice
like like often one of the things we see
is the very things that got you to that
spot are working against you going
forward right like you're being frugal
saving aggressively being very
disciplined and now you're saying hey
I've been putting off this delayed
gratification thing was really important
maybe like but it definitely got you to
the spot it's you get to a a point at
which you should no longer delay there's
not going to be time to delay
>> it's so tough for some people to make so
you practice You just like like your
boat example is great. Yeah. Like I I
mean I literally have had people who
can't spend any money and like you're
saying have enough money that they could
spend it for the rest of their lives,
>> right?
>> Go like go get a coffee with a friend,
pay for theirs
>> and just
>> un go on the trip and enjoy the trip,
right? just what one of my favorite
stories is from Allan Smith in the UK
had a client he's a great financial
planner had a client that um had rel and
he's told this story publicly had a
client that had relatives that had moved
there was a bunch of people from Wales
that moved to Argentina for mining way
back way back in the day where you're
going to go with this a bunch of his
relatives moved a bunch of her relatives
moved she'd always wanted to go see the
Welsh national rugby team play the
Argentinian the Pumas right
>> in Argentina.
>> How hard is that?
>> And she was like, I just can't. I can't.
And he's like, you could do this every
year for you could do this every month
for the rest of your life. It'd be like,
well, I can't sit that long. You could
have a lay flat bed,
>> right?
>> And and so he finally
>> or you could go from Wales to New York,
go from New York to Brazil, go from
Brazil to Argentina. You could you don't
have to do. So he finally just over time
like got her used to the idea. She went
and she says it was the best. Like we're
never going to replicate those things.
We're never going to We're never going
to
>> AI is not going to replace that.
>> No. And so to me, it's like, dude, I
think I would I don't know if I'd rather
air on being irresponsible, but I know I
should we should spend the money. Spend
the money.
>> You know, when you irresponsibility
never comes into it. You're looking at
someone's portfolio. Yeah. Hey, you have
$10 million. You live on 350 a year. You
want to bust out another 50
>> so you can take the whole family to the
old country and show them where your
grandparents came from?
>> Why not?
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, it's not even $100,000.
>> Yeah. And so I think to me
>> these, by the way, are very first world
problems.
>> Of course. But but they're problems.
Like I've decided Bnee Brown got really
clear about like comparative suffering
does us no good, right? So I always like
like whenever I hear first world
problems, I'm always like, well, yeah,
but it this is a challenge and it
happens to be the challenge that many of
your clients and the people I'm talking
to are facing. So why not just practice
like can we pick something small, right?
Something you've always wanted to do,
right? And it might be simple like take
the grandkids to to the art museum this
weekend.
>> I'm going to share another line with
you. Um not comparative suffering
>> often falsely attributed to Teddy
Roosevelt. It hadn't been around till
like the late 1980s. Comparison is the
thief of joy.
>> Yeah, for sure.
>> What a great phrase that is. And it's
really there's always someone with a
bigger boat or a a larger house or a
faster car, whatever it whatever you're
envious of.
>> You have this car. You really happy with
it? Then who cares what the guy down the
block has? That that's pointless. And
just real quickly, that's one thing that
I think makes this even harder is we're
never exactly sure. Do we really want
the boat?
>> Do you know what I mean?
>> Well, if you're not sure, then that's
easy. Don't get the boat.
>> Yeah. Go out on But but you could go out
for a day.
>> You could rent a boat.
>> Try little experiments. Try little
experiments cuz I just remember growing
up, I always wanted I grew up in the
hills in Utah, right? We all had BMX
bikes.
>> I love this BMX story of yours.
>> I always always want a slightly better
BMX bike.
>> Oh, no. You wanted a really nice bike
and what did you end up doing?
>> Which one are you talking about? Are you
talking about the road bike? The moots
that I end up spending a moot titanium
bike out of steamboat. Different
different story. But yeah, that's one of
those moments where I Are you kidding?
Those things were I could not like
>> I think those are six or 7,000. That's
nothing today in terms of people.
>> Oh, no. You could drop 10 grand on a
bike.
>> But still, it was like and that bike
like per unit of dollar per unit of fun.
>> I've never made a better investment.
Right. Right. But what's a BMX story?
>> When I was little, when I was like
eight, we all had like I had slightly
better BMX bike than some of my buddies
and my buddies, some of my buddies had
slightly better. That's all I knew.
>> Right.
>> I didn't know at the time that I was
supposed to want a private jet.
>> Uhhuh.
>> And now I do. Like now Instagram has
taught me. So I think we have this
problem of like cultivating our
comparison set. So now we're talking
even getting clear about your the word
goal
>> is hard cuz you don't know if it's your
mom's goal, if it's society's goal, if
it's Instagram's goal, $5 million in a
sailboat, like when did you insane?
>> Where did that come from?
>> Let me share a fun private jet story
with you.
>> I love private jet stories.
>> So whenever anybody used to ask me, hey,
you going to sell the firm? What's your
FU money? Questions like that,
>> my answer has always been the same.
whatever it takes to never step foot
into a commercial airport ever again.
And then I I made the mistake of saying
this in public somewhere and I started
getting marquee jet na all these guys
started sending [laughter] me pictures.
So out of curiosity one day I said run
the numbers for me. What does this
really look like? So it turns out east
coast 6,6500 an hour cross country to
California 8,000. you want to go to
Europe, it's 12,000 per hour,
>> right,
>> of travel. So, do the math. So, I start
>> I'm a deep down inside I'm a numbers
guy. I'm like, oh, this is quarter
million, half million a year. For that
to be rational, you have to be not have
$10 million. You have to be earning
>> $10 million gross
>> to spend a mere 5% of your annual income
and and cap gains
>> uh on on a PJ at half a million per
>> um PJ right from succession. I never
heard that phrase before that show. And
so all of a sudden I'm like, "Oh, I have
no interest in that. I don't ever expect
to be make pulling down 10 million a
year." Yeah. And while it's attractive
bypassing all of
>> uh airports, I kind of learn, all right,
so I'm not going to go on hightra days.
We travel for Thanksgiving weekend. I'm
the first flight out Thursday morning.
Yeah.
>> With blow through security in five
minutes. Two hours later, it's a zoo,
right? So, all right, I'm not going to
spend a half a million dollars a year. I
could spend a little bit of brain power
>> trying to navigate around the worst
worst. I I won't arrive at the airport
at 5:00 because I don't want to get get
stuck in traffic and I won't take a 9:00
>> flight in the morning that require so
like all right I'm not flying private
I'm trying to fly a little smarter
commercial
>> even if you're in the front of the
plane.
>> Yeah. But that to me is a really good
example of like thinking that something
might be important running a little bit
of an experiment just actually running
the numbers deciding. So, we're just
constantly narrowing in for our whole
lives on and those things change.
>> It would still it would still be
delightful to be able to just show up at
the airport
>> and you made a trade-off when you want
to leave and you know save a day of
travel on each side
>> for sure.
>> But is that worth half a million dollars
a year?
>> Yeah. To you it's not [sighs]
>> in order to make it I had [laughter] I'm
I'm oversharing but I'm going to
overshare one more thing. So I I'm
friends of my wife get a pier to tear in
the city. They're empty nesters. They
downsize. They have a house and they
have the city apartment. And I started
thinking about a pier to tear. We we
loved when we lived down at Grammar
Park. And I start looking at this and I
again I start running the numbers and
I'm like wait a second just the monthly
co-op fees are like three or four grand
a month to say nothing of the the
insurance the taxes
>> and the one two three four $5 million
purchase price whatever the hell it is.
And I'm doing the math and I'm like gee
this is really like five grand a month.
It's 60,000 a year.
>> I can't spend and we take weekends in
the city. I can't spend $60,000 a year
>> on hotels, restaurants. Like, I can't
get it. I can't spend that much if I
tried. Like, we do a few weekends in the
city. It's a couple hundred, a couple
thousand bucks, but it's certainly not
60 grand. Per tear makes no sense to me.
And I'm explaining this. I'm having this
conversation with a very wealthy client
and I see this look on her face and I
go, "Oh, you're saying if $60,000 is too
much in co-op fees, you really can't
afford this piet."
>> And she says, "Well, I I I wasn't
exactly thinking it, but you're not
wrong." Right.
>> And and what I was about to defend
myself with was, "Well, the $60,000 just
isn't worth it to me." But before I said
that, it was like, "Yeah, but if you had
50 or hundred million dollars, who
cares? I just want a place that I'm
comfortable in the bed, my clothes are
in the closet, and I'm not dealing with
checking into a hotel that's worth 60
grand to me. If you have X dollars
>> and um she never said that, but I
immediately I immediately like
>> I have a question for you.
>> I can't afford this."
>> On the heels of that, I have a question
for you. What's the last thing you deci
you decided I'm going to buy that? And
you didn't. you were just like, I don't
care. I'm just buying it. Doesn't matter
how much it costs that you didn't
actually cuz both those examples, you're
like, I wanted a thing. I went and ran
the numbers, decided not to do a thing.
Is there a time when you're decided not
to do it?
>> No, you decided to do it. You're like, I
and I just threw I didn't even care what
the number said. I didn't even look. I
just wanted to do that thing so bad. I
was just like, I'm doing it.
>> There's two answers. There's the Barry
before he turned 60 and the Barry after
he turned 60.
>> Really? when when Barry turned 60. So I
I think this is a function of
immaturity. I never had a midlife crisis
probably because when I should have I
was still an idiot child. I still was 10
20 years maturity level below where I
should have been.
>> And I turned 60 and I very much woke up
with the sensation, all right, fourth
quarter down by seven. If you want to
win this game, you got to get busy. Like
literally that was what I thought,
>> right? And um I've told I don't know if
I ever told this story on uh the podcast
and I I the spouse still survives so I
can't really go into details but person
about to sell a business for a ton of
money hundreds of millions of dollars
gets a a diagnosis
>> six months to live
>> and when you know you know this if
you're managing money for enough
families the actuarial tables are such
that people will begin to die. I mean,
it that's just the normal human finite
lifespan.
>> And so, it's easy to start to pick up
that pattern of
>> life is short. What are you waiting for?
So, the combination of turning 60 soon
after the pandemic ended and a lot of
people a lot of people lost a lot of
people
>> during that. I kind of said money should
never prevent anyone from experiencing
joy.
>> And so what I what I started doing is
not saying no
>> and gifting a lot of stuff. Like my
favorite thing in the world around
Christmas is to pick a book and send it
to 10, 20, 30 friends
>> the same book. And I'm like 20 bucks is
20 30 bucks. This year it was The Uncool
by Cameron Crowe.
>> Wow.
>> And I was just talking about this with
somebody and I I said, "Oh, I gave that
book to a few people for Christmas." And
I went through Amazon. Oh, I gave 26 of
these to various people. So good.
>> It's $300.
Anybody who's making
>> Yeah, I love that idea.
>> Reasonable income. By the way, you don't
have to wait until Christmas.
>> I know. I I was just thinking about that
Carl's book, Carl's Secret Book Club.
>> It's um
>> like launching that.
>> It's a really fun thing. Now, there's a
little bit of uh puzzle figuring out
what's the right book for the right
person and not everybody gets the same
book because they're different people.
But all this comes back to
>> spend the money. [sighs]
>> So, so I
again, it's the end of the podcast so I
can I can say stuff.
>> Alexis, no cutting any of this out. So
uh 1988 911 Cabrio I purchased three or
four years ago for like 60 grand. It was
an old ratty car that needed to be
restored and the plan was to convert it
to an EV.
>> This car wasn't right for that. So I
ended up doing it with an 87 coupe with
300,000 kilometers on it. But the 88
turned out to be this rare matching
numbers M491
911 that was worth a ton more than I
paid for it. Wow.
>> So I put a bunch of money into it. My
wife was complaining.
[snorts] My wife was complaining she
doesn't get to drive a stick anymore. So
hey honey, here's your weekend car. I
bought it for this reason. We're just
parking cash in. It's worth double what
I paid. Drive it. And she's like it's
loud. It smells. It doesn't have ABS. It
doesn't. She goes, "Nice, nice clutch,
but no airbags, no ABS." And I'm like,
"So, what are you saying? You uh by the
way, this is my cross to bear. My wife
is very unhappy that I got her a old
911, and she is forcing me to buy a
newer Porsche." Like, these are problems
that most married men do [laughter] not
have. That's how you know you married
the right woman. If your wife says nice
clutch, you're you're on to something.
>> I taught her to drive a stick when we
were dating. She drives a stick better
>> than So her daily is an unusual color.
By the way, another great purchase
during the pandemic when everybody was
freaked out. I got her a um Panamera 4S
hybrid in amethyst metallic, super rare
color, substantially less than it it
should have. And some of the one of the
guys from my um car group says to me one
day, you know, you have the only
amethyst metallic Panamera on the
island. I saw your wife driving it. I
tried to catch her. She's got a crazy
lead foot. I couldn't catch her. I was
beeping. I was waving. So I'm like, "Oh,
I'll ask her." So I go home that night
and I said I said, "Hey, how was your
day?" She goes, "Crazy thing. This guy
in a green 911 was heranging me, was
chasing me and I just put the hammer
down and this guy couldn't catch me."
[laughter] And I said, "You know that
was Joe. That green, it was green,
right?" She's like, "Yeah, yeah, that
was Joe. He was just swinging trying to
catch up to say hi." [laughter] I'm
like, "Weren't he he said he couldn't
catch you? It's a GT3. It's like the
fastest street legal, [laughter] you
know, just below the Turbo S. There's
only one other car. Um, that's a fastest
street legal Porsche with a stick shift.
>> Um,
>> so good.
>> So,
>> that's what I'm talking about.
>> So, so I I am in the process of swapping
the 88 for a 2024. I I know exactly what
I'm going to replace it with. I found a
little bit of a unicorn. Wow.
>> Um, the only problem is the color is
wrong. But it turns out it you you know
a new car, a relatively new car, you put
a PPF wrap around it to protect the
paint. Now they make those wraps in
colors. So you could get I really like
this paint to sample purple violet.
That's like a $20,000 upgrade when you
order the car new. No, just put plastic
on. It's six grand and now you have the
car whatever color.
>> So she picked that color. This is She's
going to be the purple.
>> I found this. It's a GTS. It's a Cabrio.
It's a stick. It's a chalk interior,
which is even rarer. And rare still
ceramic brakes. Um,
>> so good.
>> It's just the wrong color. It's like I'm
going to fix this. Don't worry.
>> So good.
>> So, that was the This is an obscene
amount of money and I don't care.
>> Yeah. Yeah. You tell me that
>> 20 years from now,
>> nobody looks back and says, "Oh, why did
I buy that?" Yeah,
>> we look back in regret on the things we
didn't do. That's exactly
>> not the things we did.
>> I mean, my version of that is 2 months
ago, I did not know that my 24 year old
24 25 year old son
>> 23 year old anyway 24 year old son was
going to ask me to go spend some time
adventure on adventure motorcycles this
summer.
>> Uhhuh.
>> It wasn't in my financial plan.
>> Do you have a license for that? Yeah, I
actually do because 10 years ago or five
years ago, I was on a BMW the 900 GS.
>> Oh, that's a big bike.
>> Yeah. And so we just got Yamaha uh T7s.
>> So the Tenner Tenner 700, which is a
great bike, but my son is the one I
didn't know that it's costing me more
money than I had planned on spending
>> and I'm not going to regret a second of
it.
>> Isn't that what else? That's the whole
point.
>> First of all, you have to stop and and I
know you have gratitude drawings in
here. the fact that it's a realistic
option for your eye to indulge in these
ridiculous spending things. And part of
me knows how utterly ridiculous,
>> of course,
>> this is. So, first, you have to have
some gratitude for that. But second,
>> if not for that, what are you going to
do with the money?
>> And and the fact that my 20some son
asked me to do it,
>> he's enthusiastic.
>> The answer is yes. Right. I wrote I
called Yeah. The answer is yes. You
know, and and so what am I gonna look
back five years from now, 10 years from
now, 30 years from now and regret that?
There's no We spent more money than we
really should have on our four years
living in New Zealand,
>> right?
>> And I would do it.
>> What years were you in New Zealand?
>> 16 to 20. We didn't mean to do it. It
wasn't political. We went 16 for a year.
We ended up just staying for four.
>> Yeah. 16.
>> I assume it was fantastic.
>> Unbelievable.
We spent way more. It was borderline
irresponsible in this case even but it
was a requirement. My wife was
essentially like after the financial
crisis and everything that went I was
just a broken human and
>> really
>> oh just
>> I never thought of you that way
>> to Well that's nice of you but yeah I
did she that was part of the problem is
I was a superhum
>> out here and not not inside not in the
house and it was just a lack of patience
and not deep presence and she was like
we're going would you like to come
[laughter]
>> and I was like yes we ended up staying
four years it was hard moneywise like it
was a bad decision financially
>> were you working there.
>> Yeah. But I you know like you in New
Zealand is you're not doing the same
thing like
>> you're not that far from China. Did you
do anything in Asia at all?
>> Did very little. No. So really but but
but my point really is it probably
wasn't the best from a spreadsheet
financial decision,
>> but I would I would do it again all
over. So for sure same thing with a car.
spend to the degree that you can find
the things that align with your use of
capital and your family and your the
experiences with the people you love. We
know that we will not regret. We will
not regret spending time and money on
experiences with people we love.
>> So, we've been we've been at this for a
solid 90 minutes. Let me jump to my
favorite questions I ask all my guests.
Otherwise, I'm going to keep you here
through dinner.
>> Yeah. Starting with who were your early
mentors who helped shape your career?
>> I I I know you asked that question. I
thought really carefully about it and
the one that actually probably had the
biggest shaping on me was a little far.
Ron had a huge impact. So between Ron
and Seth Goden.
>> Oh really? Seth Goden stuff is really
interesting.
>> Yeah. And Seth I always saw Seth as
somebody who was doing something here
that applied here.
>> Uhhuh. And that that was really like
>> so doing something in a narrow little
space like he was broad marketing guy
marketing marketing marketing but you
know it had broad application and doing
it consistently over a long period of
time. I mean behavior app radio was
started because of Seth's daily blog.
>> Uhhuh.
>> He said to me why aren't you doing a
daily blog? I said I don't like to
write. He said you like to talk. And so
I started we're episode 1500 now. You
said yeah. So Seth Goden Ron Liieber had
the biggest impact on me.
>> Let let's talk about books. What are you
reading right now? What are some of your
favorites? My favorite
>> and I and I know when you're writing a
book it's really hard to read.
>> Yeah. Yeah. No, my my one of the most
[clears throat] two really impactful
books. Fooled by Randomness.
>> Nasim Taleb.
>> Come on.
>> I wanted to have him on the podcast. He
told me to go f myself.
>> He probably said that exactly.
>> Uh I'm giving you the [laughter] polite.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure. So that book and
then Pemachod's When Things Fall Apart.
>> That's a really interesting
>> children when things Yeah. Well, they're
both, if you understand, they're both
related to this idea that this false
sense of certainty that we talked about.
So, Pemma's work
>> has had a massive impact on me reading
right now. I just finished um literally
last night, I just finished uh home
homesick nomad about and I can't
remember her name, Brianna.
>> Fiction or non-fiction?
>> No, it's a memoir. Short little memoir
about a lady who um drives her van
around the southern the desert of
southern Utah. So, it was like a home.
She has a Utah connection, Salt Lake
connection. So, that was really good.
And and Bison for the Broken Heart or
Buffalo for the Broken Heart, Dan
O'Brien's book.
>> Someone else mentioned that.
>> I think I think you Oh, I told Meb about
it in his book Roundup.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Huh. Really interesting. Um,
>> what are you streaming these days? Tell
us what you're either listening to or
watching.
>> Mike Burbiglia.
>> Uhhuh. So hilarious.
>> Working it out.
>> You, you know, he has a podcast also.
>> Working it out. That's his podcast.
>> I thought that was the name of his
standup on
>> I listen to it religiously. I'm trying
to get Mike if you're listening. I've
been trying to get a hold of Mike for a
long time.
>> So there's a handful of comedians with
their own podcast now that not just um
>> Seth uh Seth Rogan, not not just Joe
Rogan, but for sure
>> Tom Papa has a podcast.
>> Mark Marin, the original
>> Mark is the OG in the space. Um, who's
the guy who who's the guy who is the
co-writer blocks with uh Dave Chappelle?
>> Jon a blank on his name. His pod is
occasionally interesting.
>> Pete Pete Holmes is actually really
great, too.
>> Why do I know the name Pete Holmes?
>> Pete, he's another one of these Netflix
comedians. It's amazing. Like,
>> um, Good Hang with Amy Polar. I was just
watching her with Billy Isish. That was
really kind of fun.
>> Yeah.
>> Um,
there's a ton of them.
>> Yeah. Really? I mean his is the reason I
really like Brookley is is it's really
about like the process right and I think
about a lot of my work especially the
public speaking about like testing bits
you know seeing how they land paying
attention that didn't work quite the way
I wanted to and Mike does a really good
job of explaining that and then I just
finished the dark wizard Dean Potter's
the story of Dean Potter who was an LCAP
climber long before LCAP climbing was
you know this mainstream thing and
>> about his untimely passing through base
jumping or something is an amazing story
for
>> there there are a lot of these hobbies
like I I don't mind going fast on a
track.
>> There are a lot of these hobbies where
you my brain does the riskreward
analysis and say oh there's just way too
much random risk in this
>> like he's a wing sutor.
>> Yeah. [snorts]
>> Yeah. I mean he he was driven by the
fact that the only thing that made him
feel alive was the the death
consequence.
>> Right.
>> That's a whole another thing. It's It's
called The Dark Wizard.
>> It's a psychological issue.
>> Yeah. Yeah, for sure. But it was super
interesting.
>> We'll skip that. Final two questions.
>> What sort of advice would you give a
recent college grad interested in a
career in either uh being a financial
planner, being an author, being an
artist,
>> and I know you sometimes don't think of
yourself as an artist, but you clearly
are.
>> Yeah.
um
just take the next step, right? Like I
just I think like getting too caught up
in how is this going to work and what's
the narrative steps? Yeah. And thousand
miles starts with
>> try not to compare like there's a loud
sue quote be who you really are and go
the whole way.
>> And I think I wish I would have started
that a little earlier like what does it
even mean? Okay, take one small step
when take one small step. And if I was
preparing in finance, I'd get more
comfortable especially in the advice
side get more comfortable with learning
to be deeply present with people.
curiosity question
>> deeply present.
>> I think financial advisors aren't going
to be paid for solutions. If they are
right now, they're not going to be paid.
They're going to be paid for presence
like opening up the ability to have
these cuz the solutions are table stakes
at this point, right? And but the it's
like self-driving cars. I was in the
Whimo, right? It was safer than the Uber
driver, right?
>> Feel very weird.
>> But here's the thing. I still had to
tell it where to go.
>> And even more importantly on the
journey, if I saw something like, "Oh,
wait. What's that park?"
>> Right? I think that requires
>> Could you do that in a way? Could you
ask it to stop?
>> Yeah, you can tell it to stop. Yeah. I
don't know how you do it, but I you can
tell. So, I'm a big fan of self-driving
money. I can't wait. And there's still
going to be somebody there that needs to
say, "Hey, is this really is the boat
really important to you? Go try the f go
try the racetrack thing, you know, like
and I that to me is curiosity and
presence." Still, you got to be a
technical rockstar, but curiosity and
presence is where the value will be.
>> Final question. What is it that you know
about the world of investing or
psychology today? Might have been useful
back in the 1990s when you were first
looking at that Netscape IPO.
>> Yeah.
Yeah. That that
compounding does all the work, right?
Like that that if like stop spending
time trying to find the best investment
and just own stuff. If it comp if it
compounds, I don't know who said this.
If it compounds, let it compound. Uh the
line I use is your job is to prevent
yourself from interfering with your
portfolio's ability to
>> exactly right. That time
>> is the thing that matters.
>> Absolutely. Carl, this has been
absolutely a delight. Normally I want to
make this about the guest, but there's
something about you that just encourages
me.
>> My whole goal.
>> Um
I it's your it's your uh
>> it's your aura. you you bring it out in
people, which is probably why you were a
good advisor. You get people to open up
to you.
>> That's a really high compliment. Thank
you very much.
>> It is. It absolutely is.
>> Yeah. Cheers.
>> We have been speaking with Carl
Richards. He is the author of the book
Your Money: Reimagining Wealth in
[music] 101 Simple Sketches. If you
enjoy this conversation, well, be sure
and check out any of [music] the 639
we've done over the past 12 [music]
years. You can find those at YouTube,
Bloomberg, Spotify, Apple, or wherever
you get your favorite podcasts. I would
be remiss if I didn't thank the crack
team that helps put these conversations
together [music]
each week. Alexis Noriega is my very
patient video [music] producer,
producer, New Yorker, dropping the R.
Um, Sean Russo is my researcher. Anna
Luke is my producer. I'm Barry Rutz.
You've been listening to Masters in
Business on Bloomberg Radio.